Hands On Helping was founded by Ryan Anderson a Chicago native and Loyola
Chicago graduate. He has for the last 10 years worked during the summers on
boats along Chicago's lakefront from the months May through mid October as the
owner of his business Goodfellas Marine Service. That short season has opened
up a large time off mostly during months when you really don't want to be in
Chicago anyway as the weather is far from comfortable. He often spent his
winter backpacking around South East Asia and finally settled down on an
island off the east coast of Thailand called Koh Phangan.
With his life long love of cooking and missing all the fine Mexican fare
Chicago has to offer he decided to build a Mexican restaurant from the ground
up. Andoloco Mexican restaurant and bar has now been open almost 2 years.
Where does an orphanage building foundation fall into this story?



The year prior to building Andoloco he volunteered for 5 weeks with an
organization called Global Volunteer Network (GVN) based in New Zealand and
chose to be placed in Katmandu Nepal. Luckily he was high and dry in the
Himalayas when the tsunami hit Thailand. Knowing he was going to be in a needy
orphanage there, he decided to write up a fundraising letter and circulated it
with his customers, friends and family. He easily raised $3000!

He asked to be placed at the neediest orphanage the organization worked with
and needy it sure was. One broken outdoor toilet for 30 kids sleeping
unsupervised in one cold house with mud and stick floors is just a quick
description to what he was shocked to find at Himali Orphanage. Using the
local staff of GVN and their truck he put together a punch list and began
hitting the local markets and the bartering began. Load after load of
inexpensive goods were delivered to Himali and a new bathroom was built. Ryan
realized really how easy, inexpensive and rewarding of an experience it was. 
Once the dust settled from the opening of the restaurant Ryan wanted to reach
out and help more orphans closer to where he was spending his winters. After
extensively traveling throughout Asia it was obvious that Cambodia was the
stand out country in terms of massive need and widespread poverty.



Toward the end of the 2006 summer Ryan began fundraising for his winter
charity. A large party was held at The Globe Pub and over $4000 was raised in
one night. Friends of Ryan began volunteering their time to organize and
improve the fundraising process and together including sending out another
fundraising letter $10,000 was raised total.

Mid October Ryan arrived in Phnom Penh and connected with his friend and taxi
driver Mr. Bolen and immediately they got to work. Together with the help of
some local expat tips we found 3 different orphanages to assist. Prioritizing
them in order of need, he began to process of inspecting the houses and
interviewing the owners. Ryan distributed vitamins and teamed up with a local
Australian doctor to provide extensive medicine kits including having all the
bottles labeled in Khmer. Water filtration systems were installed and fresh
fruit was brought with each visit. We converted all the kitchens from dirty
and environmentally damaging wood burning stoves into clean gas. All the
children got new school uniforms and we hired English teachers to teach full
time. Walls were built where the rain used to come in and the kids were
brought to the national museum and water park for educational and fun field
trips. Over 130 children's lives were impacted this last winter alone!

When Ryan left Cambodia the helping continued. We still employ one English
teacher full time and these orphanages are now on the tourist map. Posters
were designed and placed in hotels, internet cafes and guesthouses inviting
backpackers and tourists to help the Cambodia by visiting one of Phnom Penh's
many orphanages. We encouraged tourists to bring fruit, school supplies and
food money and the program has been a huge success. Currently we have many
foreigners who find the kids so charming that they stay and volunteer weeks at
a time at the orphanages and multiple people and organizations have discovered
these orphanages and are pledging serious money. We designed and bought t
shirts that the kids can sell to visitors This successful program can be
copied and implemented at any needy orphanage and that is what Hands On
Helping plans on doing. Hop on board and help any way you can. We are just
getting started!

